---
title: A Petition From the Manufacturers of Candles, Tapers, Lanterns, sticks, Street Lamps, Snuffers, and Extinguishers, and from Producers of Tallow, Oil, Resin, Alcohol, and Generally of Everything Connected with Lighting.
author: Frederic Bastiat
---

**To the Honourable Members of the Chamber of Deputies.**

Gentlemen:

You are on the right track.  You reject abstract theories and have little
regard for abundance and low prices.  You concern yourselves mainly with the
fate of the producer.  You wish to free him from foreign competition, that is,
to reserve the *domestic market* for *domestic industry*.


We come to offer you a wonderful opportunity for your &mdash; what shall we
call it?  Your theory? No, nothing is more deceptive than theory.  Your
doctrine? Your system? Your principle?  But you dislike doctrines, you have a
horror of systems, as for principles, you deny that there are any in political
economy; therefore we shall call it your practice &mdash; your practice without
theory and without principle.

We are suffering from the ruinous competition of a rival who apparently works
under conditions so far superior to our own for the production of light that he
is *flooding* the *domestic market* with it at an incredibly low price; for the
moment he appears, our sales cease, all the consumers turn to him, and a branch
of French industry whose ramifications are innumerable is all at once reduced
to complete stagnation.  This rival, which is none other than the sun, is
waging war on us so mercilessly we suspect he is being stirred up against us by
perfidious Albion (excellent diplomacy nowadays!), particularly because he has
for that haughty island a respect that he does not show for us.

We ask you to be so good as to pass a law requiring the closing of all windows,
dormers, skylights, inside and outside shutters, curtains, casements,
bull's-eyes, deadlights, and blinds &mdash; in short, all openings, holes,
chinks, and fissures through which the light of the sun is wont to enter
houses, to the detriment of the fair industries with which, we are proud to
say, we have endowed the country, a country that cannot, without betraying
ingratitude, abandon us today to so unequal a combat. 

Be good enough, honourable deputies, to take our request seriously, and do not
reject it without at least hearing the reasons that we have to advance in its
support.

First, if you shut off as much as possible all access to natural light, and
thereby create a need for artificial light, what industry in France will not
ultimately be encouraged?

If France consumes more tallow, there will have to be more cattle and sheep,
and, consequently, we shall see an increase in cleared fields, meat, wool,
leather, and especially manure, the basis of all agricultural wealth.

If France consumes more oil, we shall see an expansion in the cultivation of
the poppy, the olive, and rapeseed.  These rich yet soil-exhausting plants will
come at just the right time to enable us to put to profitable use the increased
fertility that the breeding of cattle will impart to the land.

Our moors will be covered with resinous trees.  Numerous swarms of bees will
gather from our mountains the perfumed treasures that today waste their
fragrance, like the flowers from which they emanate.

Thus, there is not one branch of agriculture that would not undergo a great
expansion. 

The same holds true of shipping.  Thousands of vessels will engage in whaling,
and in a short time we shall have a fleet capable of upholding the honour of
France and of gratifying the patriotic aspirations of the undersigned
petitioners, chandlers, etc.

But what shall we say of the *specialities* of *Parisian manufacture*?
Henceforth you will behold gilding, bronze, and crystal in candlesticks, in
lamps, in chandeliers, in candelabra sparkling in spacious emporia compared
with which those of today are but stalls.

There is no needy resin-collector on the heights of his sand dunes, no poor
miner in the depths of his black pit, who will not receive higher wages and
enjoy increased prosperity.

It needs but a little reflection, gentlemen, to be convinced that there is
perhaps not one Frenchman, from the wealthy stockholder of the Anzin Company to
the humblest vendor of matches, whose condition would not be improved by the
success of our petition.

We anticipate your objections, gentlemen; but there is not a single one of them
that you have not picked up from the musty old books of the advocates of free
trade.  We defy you to utter a word against us that will not instantly rebound
against yourselves and the principle behind all your policy. 

Will you tell us that, though we may gain by this protection, France will not
gain at all, because the consumer will bear the expense?

We have our answer ready:

You no longer have the right to invoke the interests of the consumer.  You have
sacrificed him whenever you have found his interests opposed to those of the
producer.  You have done so in order *to encourage industry and to increase
employment*.  For the same reason you ought to do so this time too.

Indeed, you yourselves have anticipated this objection.  When told that the
consumer has a stake in the free entry of iron, coal, sesame, wheat, and
textiles, "Yes," you reply, "but the producer has a stake in their
exclusion." Very well, surely if consumers have a stake in the admission of
natural light, producers have a stake in its interdiction.

"But," you may still say, "the producer and the consumer are one and the
same person.  If the manufacturer profits by protection, he will make the
farmer prosperous.  Contrariwise, if agriculture is prosperous, it will open
markets for manufactured goods." Very well, If you grant us a monopoly over
the production of lighting during the day, first of all we shall buy large
amounts of tallow, charcoal, oil, resin, wax, alcohol, silver, iron, bronze,
and crystal, to supply our industry; and, moreover, we and our numerous
suppliers, having become rich, will consume a great deal and spread prosperity
into all areas of domestic industry.

Will you say that the light of the sun is a gratuitous gift of Nature, and that
to reject such gifts would be to reject wealth itself under the pretext of
encouraging the means of acquiring it?

But if you take this position, you strike a mortal blow at your own policy;
remember that up to now you have always excluded foreign goods *because* and
*in proportion* as they approximate gratuitous gifts.  You have only *half* as
good a reason for complying with the demands of other monopolists as you have
for granting our petition, which is in *complete* accord with your established
policy; and to reject our demands precisely because they are *better founded*
than anyone else's would be tantamount to accepting the equation: `>+ x + = -`;
in other words, it would be to heap *absurdity* upon *absurdity*.

Labour and Nature collaborate in varying proportions, depending upon the
country and the climate, in the production of a commodity.  The part that
Nature contributes is always free of charge; it is the part contributed by
human labour that constitutes value and is paid for.

If an orange from Lisbon sells for half the price of an orange from Paris, it
is because the natural heat of the sun, which is, of course, free of charge,
does for the former what the latter owes to artificial heating, which
necessarily has to be paid for in the market.

Thus, when an orange reaches us from Portugal, one can say that it is given to
us half free of charge, or, in other words, at *half price* as compared with
those from Paris.

Now, it is precisely on the basis of its being *semigratuitous* (pardon the
word) that you maintain it should be barred.  You ask: "How can French labour
withstand the competition of foreign labour when the former has to do all the
work, whereas the latter has to do only half, the sun taking care of the
rest?" But if the fact that a product is *half* free of charge leads you to
exclude it from competition, how can its being *totally* free of charge induce
you to admit it into competition?  Either you are not consistent, or you
should, after excluding what is half free of charge as harmful to our domestic
industry, exclude what is totally gratuitous with all the more reason and with
twice the zeal.

To take another example: When a product &mdash; coal, iron, wheat, or textiles
&mdash; comes to us from abroad, and when we can acquire it for less labour
than if we produced it ourselves, the difference is a *gratuitous gift* that is
conferred up on us.  The size of this gift is proportionate to the extent of
this difference.  It is a quarter, a half, or three-quarters of the value of
the product if the foreigner asks of us only three-quarters, one-half, or
one-quarter as high a price.  It is as complete as it can be when the donor,
like the sun in providing us with light, asks nothing from us.  The question,
and we pose it formally, is whether what you desire for France is the benefit
of consumption free of charge or the alleged advantages of onerous production.
Make your choice, but be logical; for as long as you ban, as you do, foreign
coal, iron, wheat, and textiles, *in proportion* as their price approaches
zero, how inconsistent it would be to admit the light of the sun, whose price
is *zero* all day long!
