---
title: A Republic, If You Can Keep It
author: Ron Paul

layout: article
---

## Introduction

The dawn of a new century and millennium is upon us and prompts many
to reflect on our past and prepare for the future.  Our nation,
divinely blessed, has much to be thankful for.  The blessings of
liberty resulting from the republic our forefathers designed have far
surpassed the wildest dreams of all previous generations.

The form of government secured by the Declaration of Independence, the
American Revolution, and the Constitution is unique in history and
reflects the strongly held beliefs of the American Revolutionaries.

At the close of the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia on
September 18, 1787, a Mrs. Powel anxiously awaited the results, and as
Benjamin Franklin emerged from the long task now finished, asked him
directly: "Well Doctor, what have we got, a republic or a monarchy?"
"A republic if you can keep it" responded Franklin.

The term republic had a significant meaning for both of them and all
early Americans.  It meant a lot more than just representative
government and was a form of government in stark contrast to pure
democracy where the majority dictated laws and rights.  And getting
rid of the English monarchy was what the Revolution was all about, so
a monarchy was out of the question.

The American Republic required strict limitation of government power.
Those powers permitted would be precisely defined and delegated by the
people, with all public officials being bound by their oath of office
to uphold the Constitution.  The democratic process would be limited
to the election of our leaders and not used for granting special
privileges to any group or individual nor for defining rights.

Federalism, the binding together loosely of the several states, would
serve to prevent the concentration of power in a central government
and was a crucial element in the new Republic.  The authors of the
Constitution wrote strict limits on the national government and strove
to protect the rights and powers of the states and the people.

Dividing and keeping separate the legislative, executive, and the
judiciary branches, provided the checks and balances thought needed to
preserve the Republic the Constitution created and the best way to
preserve individual liberty.

The American Revolutionaries clearly chose liberty over security, for
their economic security and their very lives were threatened by
undertaking the job of forming a new and limited government.  Most
would have been a lot richer and safer by sticking with the King.
Economic needs or desires were not the driving force behind the early
American patriotic effort.

The Revolution and subsequent Constitution settled the question as to
which authority should rule man's action: the individual or the state.
The authors of the Constitution clearly understood that man has free
will to make personal choices and be responsible for the consequences
of his own actions.  Man, they knew, was not to be simply a cog in a
wheel, or a single cell of an organism, or a branch of a tree, but an
individual with a free will and responsibility for his eternal soul as
well as his life on earth.  If God could permit spiritual freedom,
government certainly ought to permit the political freedom that allows
one to pursue life's dreams and assume one's responsibilities.  If man
can achieve spiritual redemption through grace, which allows him to
use the released spiritual energy to pursue man's highest and noblest
goals, so should man's mind, body, and property be freed from the
burdens of unchecked government authority.  The Founders were
confident that this would release the creative human energy required
to produce the goods and services that would improve the living
standards of all mankind.

Minimizing government authority over the people was critical to this
endeavor.  Just as the individual was key to salvation, individual
effort was the key to worldly endeavors.  Little doubt existed that
material abundance and sustenance came from work and effort, family,
friends, church, and voluntary community action, as long as government
did not obstruct.

No doubts were cast as to where rights came from.  They came from the
Creator, and if government could not grant rights to individuals, it
surely should not be able to take them away.  If government could
provide rights or privileges, it was reasoned, it could only occur at
the expense of someone else or with the loss of personal liberty in
general.  Our constitutional Republic, according to our Founders,
should above all else protect the rights of the minority against the
abuses of an authoritarian majority.  They feared democracy as much as
monarchy and demanded a weak executive, a restrained court, and a
handicapped legislature.

It was clearly recognized that equal justice and protection of the
minority was not egalitarianism. Socialism and welfarism were never
considered.

The colonists wanted to be free of the King's oppressive high taxes
and burdensome regulations.  It annoyed them to no end that even the
trees on their own property could not be cut without the King's
permission.  The King kept the best trees for himself and his
shipbuilding industry.  This violation of property ownership prompted
the colonists to use the pine tree on an early revolutionary flag to
symbolize the freedom they sought.

The Constitution made it clear that the government was not to
interfere with productive non-violent human energy.  This is the key
element that has permitted America's great achievements.  It was a
great plan; we should all be thankful for the bravery and wisdom of
those who established this nation and secured the Constitution for us.
We have been the political and economic envy of the world.  We have
truly been blessed.  The Founders often spoke of "divine providence"
and that God willed us this great nation.  It has been a grand
experiment, but it is important that the fundamental moral premises
that underpin this nation are understood and maintained.  We as
Members of Congress have that responsibility.

This is a good year to address this subject.  The beginning of the new
century and millennium provides a wonderful opportunity for all of us
to dedicate ourselves to studying and preserving these important
principles of liberty.

## Success of the Republic

One would have to conclude from history as well as current conditions
that the American Republic has been extremely successful.  It
certainly has allowed the creation of great wealth with a large middle
class and many very wealthy corporations and individuals.  Although
the poor are still among us, compared to other parts of the world,
even the poor in this country have done quite well.

We still can freely move about, from town to town, state to state, and
job to job.  Free education is available to everyone, even for those
who don't want it nor care about it.  Both the capable and the
incapable are offered a government education.  We can attend the
church of our choice, start a newspaper, use the Internet, and meet in
private when we choose. Food is plentiful throughout the country and
oftentimes even wasted.  Medical technology has dramatically advanced
and increased life expectancy for both men and women.

Government statistics are continuously reaffirming our great
prosperity with evidence of high and rising wages, no inflation, and
high consumer confidence and spending.  The US government still enjoys
good credit and a strong currency in relationship to most other
currencies of the world.  We have had no trouble financing our public
or private debt.  Housing markets are booming, and interest rates
remain reasonable by modern-day standards.  Unemployment is low.
Recreational spending and time spent at leisure are at historic highs.
Stock market profits are benefiting more families than ever in our
history while income, payroll, and capital gains taxes have been a
windfall to the politicians who lack no creative skills in figuring
out how to keep the tax-and-spend policies in full gear.  The American
people accept the status quo and hold few grudges against our
President.

The nature of a republic and the current status of our own are of
little concern to the American people in general.  Yet there is a
small minority, ignored by political, academic, and media personnel,
who do spend time thinking about the importance of what the proper
role for government should be.  The comparison of today's government
to the one established by our Constitution is a subject of deep
discussion for those who concern themselves with the future and look
beyond the fall election.  The benefits we enjoy are a result of the
Constitution our Founding Fathers had the wisdom to write.  However,
understanding the principles that were used to establish our nation is
crucial to its preservation and something we cannot neglect.

## The Past Century

Unbelievable changes have occurred in the 20th Century.  We went from
the horse and buggy age to the space age.  Computer technology and the
Internet have dramatically changed the way we live.  All kinds of
information and opinions on any subject are now available by clicking
a few buttons.  Technology offers an opportunity for everyone who
seeks the truth to find it, yet at the same time, it enhances the
ability of government to monitor our every physical, communicative,
and financial move.  And let there be no doubt, for the true believers
in big government, they see this technology as a great advantage for
their cause.

We are currently witnessing an ongoing effort by our government to
develop a national ID card, a medical data bank, a work data bank,
"Know Your Customer" regulations on banking activities, a National
Security Agency all-pervasive telephone snooping system called
Echelon, and many other programs.  There are good reasons to
understand the ramifications of the many technological advancements we
have seen over the century to make sure that the good technology is
not used by the government to do bad things.

The 20th Century has truly been a century of unbelievable
technological advancement.  We should be cognizant of what this
technology has done to the size and nature of our own government. It
could easily be argued that, with greater technological advances, the
need for government ought to decline and private alternatives be
enhanced.  But there's not much evidence for that argument.  In 1902
the cost of government activities at all levels came to 7.7% of the
GDP; today it's more than 50%.

Government officials oversee everything we do from regulating the
amount of water in our commodes to placing airbags in our cars, safety
locks on our guns, and using our own land.  Almost every daily
activity we engage in is monitored or regulated by some government
agency.  If one attempts to just avoid government harassment, one
finds himself in deep trouble with the law.

Yes, we can be grateful that the technological developments in the
marketplace over the last 100 years have made our lives more
prosperous and enjoyable, but any observant person must be annoyed by
the ever-present "Big Brother" that watches and records our every
move.  The idea that we're responsible for our own actions has been
seriously undermined.  And it would be grossly misleading to argue
that the huge growth in the size of government has been helpful and
necessary in raising the standard of living of so many Americans.
Since government cannot create anything, it can only resort to using
force to redistribute the goods that energetic citizens produce.  The
old-fashioned term for this is "theft."  It's clear that our great
prosperity has come in spite of the obstacles that big government
places in our way and not because of it.  And besides, our current
prosperity may well not be as permanent as many believe.

Quite a few major changes in public policy have occurred in this
century.  These changes in policy reflect our current attitude toward
the American Republic and the Constitution and help us to understand
what to expect in the future.  Economic prosperity seems to have
prevailed, but the appropriate question asked by too few Americans is,
"Have our personal liberties been undermined?"

Taxes are certainly higher.  A federal income tax of 35 to 40% is
something many middle-class Americans must pay, while on average they
work for the government for more than half the year.  In passing on
our estates from one generation to the next, our "partner," the US
government, decides on its share before the next generation can take
over.  The estate tax certainly verifies the saying about the
inevitability of death and taxes.  At the turn of the century we had
neither, and in spite of a continuous outcry against both, there's no
sign that either will soon be eliminated.

Accepting the principle behind both the income and the estate tax
concedes the statist notion that the government owns the fruits of our
labor, as well as our savings, and we are permitted by the
politicians' "generosity" to keep a certain percentage.  Every
tax-cut proposal in Washington now is considered a "cost" to
government, not the return of something rightfully belonging to a
productive citizen.  This principle is true whether it's a 1% or a 70%
income tax.  Concern for this principle has been rarely expressed in a
serious manner over the past 50 years.  The withholding process has
permitted many to believe that a tax rebate at the end of the year
comes as a gift from government.  Because of this, the real cost of
government to the taxpayer is obscured.  The income tax has grown to
such an extent and the government is so dependent on it that any talk
of eliminating the income tax is just that, talk.

A casual acceptance of the principle behind high taxation, with an
income tax and an inheritance tax, is incompatible with a principled
belief in a true Republic.  It is impossible to maintain a high tax
system without the sacrifice of liberty and an undermining of property
ownership.  If kept in place, such a system will undermine prosperity,
regardless of how well off we may presently be.

In truth, the amount of taxes we now pay compared to 100 years ago is
shocking. There is little philosophic condemnation by the intellectual
community, the political leaders, or the media of this immoral
system. This should be a warning sign to all of us that, even in less
prosperous times, we can expect high taxes and that our productive
economic system will come under attack.  Not only have we seen little
resistance to the current high tax system, it has become an acceptable
notion that this system is moral and is a justified requirement to
finance the welfare/warfare state.  Propaganda polls are continuously
cited claiming that the American people don't want tax reductions.
High taxes, except for only short periods of time, are incompatible
with liberty and prosperity.

We will, I'm sure, be given the opportunity in the early part of this
next century to make a choice between the two.  I am certain of my
preference.

There was no welfare state in 1900.  In the year 2000 we have a huge
welfare state, which continues to grow each year.  Not that
special-interest legislation didn't exist in the 19th Century, but for
the most part, it was limited and directed toward moneyed
interests--the most egregious example being the railroads.

The modern-day welfare state has steadily grown since the Great
Depression of the 1930s.  The federal government is now involved in
providing health care, houses, unemployment benefits, education, food
stamps to millions, plus all kinds of subsidies to every conceivable
special-interest group.  Welfare is now part of our culture, costing
hundreds of billions of dollars every year.  It is now thought to be a
"right," something one is "entitled" to.  Calling it an
"entitlement" makes it sound proper and respectable and not based on
theft.  Anyone who has a need, desire, or demand and can get the
politicians' attention will get what he wants, even though it may be
at the expense of someone else.  Today it is considered morally right
and politically correct to promote the welfare state.  Any suggestion
otherwise is considered political suicide.

The acceptance of the welfare ethic and rejection of the work ethic as
the accepted process for improving one's economic conditions are now
ingrained in our political institutions.  This process was started in
earnest in the 1930s, received a big boast in the 1960s, and has
continued a steady growth, even through the 1990s, despite some
rhetoric in opposition.  This public acceptance has occurred in spite
of the fact that there is no evidence that welfare is a true help in
assisting the needy.  Its abject failure around the world where
welfarism took the next step into socialism has even a worse record.

The transition in the past hundred years from essentially no welfare
to an all-encompassing welfare state represents a major change in
attitude in the United States.  Along with its acceptance, the
promoters have dramatically reinterpreted the Constitution from the
way it had been for our first 150 years. Where the general welfare
clause once had a clear general meaning (which was intended to
prohibit special-interest welfare, and was something they detested and
revolted against under King George), it is now used to justify any
demand of any group, as long as a majority in Congress votes for it.

But the history is clear and the words in the Constitution are
precise.  Madison and Jefferson in explaining the general welfare
clause left no doubt as to its meaning.

Madison said: "With respect to the words 'general welfare,' I have
always regarded them as qualified by the detail of power connected
with them.  To take them in a literal and unlimited sense would be a
metamorphosis of the Constitution into a character which there is a
host of proofs not contemplated by its creators."  Madison argued
that there would be no purpose whatsoever for the enumeration of the
particular powers if the general welfare clause was to be broadly
interpreted.  The Constitution granted authority to the federal
government to do only 20 things, each to be carried out for the
benefit of the general welfare of all the people.  This understanding
of the Constitution, as described by the Father of the Constitution,
has been lost in this century.

Jefferson was just as clear, writing in 1798, when he said: "Congress
has not unlimited powers to provide for the general welfare but only
those specifically enumerated."

With the modern-day interpretation of the general welfare clause, the
principle of individual liberty and the doctrine of enumerated powers
have been made meaningless.  The goal of strictly limiting the power
of our national government as was intended by the Constitution is
impossible to achieve as long as it is acceptable for Congress to
redistribute wealth in an egalitarian welfare state.  There's no way
that personal liberty will not suffer with every effort to expand or
make the welfare state efficient.  And the sad part is that the
sincere efforts to help people do better economically through welfare
programs always fail.  Dependency replaces self-reliance while the
sense of self worth of the recipient suffers, making for an angry,
unhappy, and dissatisfied society.  The cost in dollar terms is high,
but the cost in terms of liberty is even greater, but generally
ignored, and in the long run, there's nothing to show for this
sacrifice.

Today, there's no serious effort to challenge welfare as a way of
life, and its uncontrolled growth in the next economic downturn is to
be expected.  Too many citizens now believe they are "entitled" to
monetary assistance from the government anytime they need it, and they
expect it.  Even in times of plenty, the direction has been to
continue expanding education, welfare, and retirement benefits.  No
one asks where the government gets the money to finance the welfare
state.  Is it morally right to do so?  Is it authorized in the
Constitution?  Does it help anyone in the long run?  Who suffers from
the policy?  Until these questions are seriously asked and correctly
answered, we cannot expect the march toward a pervasive welfare state
to stop, and we can expect our liberties to be continuously
compromised.

The concept of the Doctrine of Enumerated Powers was picked away at in
the latter part of the 19th Century over strong objection by many
constitutionalists. But it was not until the drumbeat of fear coming
from the Roosevelt administration, during the Great Depression, that
the courts virtually rewrote the Constitution by a reinterpretation of
the general welfare clause.  In 1936 the New Deal Supreme Court told
Congress and the American people that the Constitution is irrelevant
when it comes to limits being placed on congressional spending.  In a
ruling justifying the Agricultural Adjustment Act, the Court
pronounced: "The power of Congress to authorize appropriations of
public money for public purposes is not limited by the grants of
legislative power found in the Constitution."  With the stroke of a
pen, the courts amended the Constitution in such a sweeping manner
that it literally legalized the entire welfare state, which not
surprisingly, has grown by leaps and bounds ever since.  Since this
ruling, we have rarely heard the true explanation of the general
welfare clause as being a restriction of government power, not a grant
of unlimited power.

We cannot ignore corporate welfare, which is part of the problem.
Most people think the welfare state involves only giving something to
the unfortunate poor.  This is generally true, but once the principle
is established that special benefits are legitimate the moneyed
interests see the advantages in influencing the legislative process.
Our system, which pays lip service to free enterprise and
private-property ownership, is drifting toward a form of fascism or
corporatism, rather than conventional socialism.  And where the poor
never seem to benefit under welfare, corporations become richer.

But it should have been expected that once the principle of favoritism
was established, the contest would be over who has the greatest clout
in Washington.  No wonder lobbyists are willing to spend $125 million
per month influencing Congress!  It's a good investment.  No amount of
campaign finance reform or regulation of lobbyists can deal with this
problem.

The problem lies in the now-accepted role for our government.
Government has too much control over people and the market, making the
temptation and incentive to influence government irresistible and to a
degree necessary.  Curtailing how people spend their own money or
their right to petition their government will do nothing to help this
influence peddling.  Treating the symptoms and not the disease only
further undermines the principles of freedom and property ownership.

Any serious reforms or effort to break away from the welfare state
must be directed as much at corporate welfare as routine welfare.
Since there's no serious effort to reject welfare on principle, the
real conflict over how to divide what government plunders will
continue.  Once it's clear that the nation is not nearly as wealthy as
it appears, this will become a serious problem, and it will get the
attention it deserves.

Preserving liberty and restoring constitutional precepts are
impossible as long as the welfare mentality prevails, and that will
not likely change until we've run out of money.  But it will become
clear, as we move into the next century, that perpetual wealth and the
so-called balanced budget, along with an expanding welfare state,
cannot continue indefinitely.  Any effort to perpetuate it will only
occur with the further erosion of liberty.

The role of the US government in public education has changed
dramatically over the past 100 years.  Most of the major changes have
occurred in the second half of this century.  In the 19th century, the
closest the federal government got to public education was the Land
Grant College program.  In the last 40 years, the federal government
has essentially taken charge of the entire system.  It is involved in
education at every level through loans, grants, court directives,
regulations, and curriculum manipulation.  In 1900 it was of no
concern to the federal government how local schools were run at any
level.

After hundreds of billions of dollars, we have yet to see a shred of
evidence that the drift toward central control over education has
helped.  By all measurements, the quality of education is down.  There
are more drugs and violence in the public schools than ever before.
Discipline is impossible out of fear of lawsuits or charges of civil
rights violations.

Controlled curricula have downplayed the importance of our
constitutional heritage while indoctrinating our children, even in
kindergarten, with environmental mythology, internationalism, and
sexual liberation.  Neighborhood schools in the early part of the 20th
Century did not experience this kind of propaganda.

The one good result coming from our failed educational system has been
the limited but important revival of the notion that parents are
responsible for their children's education, not the state.  We have
seen literally millions of children taken from the public school
system and taught at home or in private institutions in spite of the
additional expense.  This has helped many students and has also served
to pressure the government schools into doing a better job.  And the
statistics show that middle-income and low-income families are the
most eager to seek an alternative to the public school system.

There is no doubt that the way schools are run, how the teachers
teach, and how the bills are paid is dramatically different from 100
years ago.  And even though some that go through public schools do
exceptionally well, there is clear evidence that the average high
school graduate today is far less educated than his counterpart was in
the early part of this century.

Due to the poor preparation of our high school graduates, colleges
expect very little from their students, since nearly everyone gets to
go to college who wants to.  Public school is compulsory and college
is available to almost everyone regardless of qualifications.  In
1914, English composition was required in 98% of our college; today
it's about one-third.  Only 12% of today's colleges require
mathematics be taught, where in 1914, 82% did.  No college now
requires literature courses.  But, rest assured plenty of
social-babble courses are required as we continue to dumb down our
nation.

Federal funding for education grows every year, hitting $38 billion
this year, $1 billion more than requested by the administration and 7%
over last year.  Great congressional debates occur over the size of a
classroom, student and teacher testing, bilingual education, teacher's
salaries, school violence, and drug usage.  And it's politically
incorrect to point out that all these problems are not present in the
private schools.  Every year there is less effort at the federal level
to return education to the people, the parents, and the local school
officials.  For 20 years at least, some of our presidential candidates
advocated abolishing the Department of Education and for the federal
government to get completely out of the public education
business. This year we will hear no more of that.  The President got
more money for education than he asked for, and it's considered not
only bad manners but also political suicide to argue the case for
stopping all federal government education programs.  Talk of returning
some control of federal programs to the state is not the same as
keeping the federal government out of education as directed by the
Constitution.

Of the 20 congressionally authorized functions granted by the
Constitution, education is not one of them.  That should be enough of
a reason not to be involved, but there's no evidence of any benefit,
and statistics show that great harm has resulted.  It has cost us
hundreds of billions of dollars, yet we continue the inexorable march
toward total domination of our educational system by Washington
bureaucrats and politicians.  It makes no sense!

It's argued that if the federal funding for education did not continue
education would suffer even more.  Yet we see poor and middle-class
families educating their children at home or at a private school at a
fraction of the cost of a government school education, with results
fantastically better--and all done in the absence of violence and
drugs.  A case can be made that there would be more money available
for education if we just left the money in the states to begin with
and never brought it to Washington for the bureaucrats and the
politicians to waste.  But it looks like Congress will not soon learn
this lesson, so the process will continue and the results will get
worse.

The best thing we could do now is pass a bill to give parents a $3,000
tax credit for each child they educate.  This would encourage
competition and allow a lot more choice for parents struggling to help
their children get a decent education.

The practice of medicine is now a government-managed care system, and
very few Americans are happy with it.  Not only is there little effort
to extricate the federal government from the medical-care business,
but the process of expanding the government's role continues unabated.
At the turn of the 19th Century, it was not even considered a
possibility that medical care was the responsibility of the federal
government.  Since Lyndon Johnson's Great Society programs of the
1960s, the role of the federal government in delivering medical care
has grown exponentially.  Today the federal government pays more than
60% of all the medical bills and regulates all of it.  The demands
continue for more free care at the same time complaints about the
shortcomings of managed care multiply.  Yet it's natural to assume
that government planning and financing will sacrifice quality care.
It is now accepted that people who need care are entitled to it as a
right.  This is a serious error in judgment.

There's no indication that the trend toward government medicine will
be reversed.  Our problems are related to the direct takeover of
medical care in programs like Medicare and Medicaid.  But it's also
been the interference in the free market through ERISA mandates
related to HMOs and other managed-care organizations, as well as our
tax code, that have undermined the private insurance aspect of paying
for medical care.  True medical insurance is not available.  The
government dictates all the terms.

In the early stages patients, doctors, and hospitals welcomed these
programs.  Generous care was available with more than adequate
reimbursement.  It led to what one would expect: abuse, overcharges,
and overuse.  When costs rose, it was necessary through government
rulemaking and bureaucratic management to cut reimbursement and limit
the procedures available and personal choice of physicians.  We don't
have socialized medicine, but we do have bureaucratic medicine,
mismanaged by the government and select corporations who usurped the
decision-making power from the physician.  The way medical care is
delivered today in the United States is a perfect example of the evils
of corporatism, an artificial system that only politicians responding
to the special interests could create.

There's no reason to believe the market cannot deliver medical care in
as efficient a manner as it does computers, automobiles, and
televisions.  But the confidence is gone and everyone assumes, just as
it is in education, that only a federal bureaucracy is capable of
solving the problems of maximizing the number of people, including the
poor, who receive the best medical care available.  In an effort to
help the poor, the quality of care has gone down for everyone else and
the costs have skyrocketed.

Making generous medical savings accounts available is about the only
program talked about today that offers an alternative to government
mismanaged care.  If something of this sort is not soon implemented,
we can expect more pervasive government involvement in the practice of
medicine. With a continual deterioration of its quality, the private
practice of medicine will soon be gone.

Government housing programs are no more successful than the federal
government's medical and education programs.  In the early part of
this century, government housing was virtually unheard of.  Now the
HUD budget commands over $30 billion each year and increases every
year.  Finances of mortgages through the Federal Home Loan Bank, the
largest federal government borrower, is the key financial institution
pumping in hundreds of billions of dollars of credit into the housing
market, making things worse.  The Federal Reserve has now started to
use home mortgage securities for monetizing debt.

Public housing has a reputation for being a refuge for drugs, crimes,
and filth, with projects being torn down as routinely as they are
built.  There's every indication that this entitlement will continue
to expand in size, regardless of its failures.  Token local control
over these expenditures will do nothing to solve the problem.
Recently the Secretary of HUD, using public funds to sue gun
manufacturers, claimed this is necessary to solve the problem of crime
which government housing perpetuates.  If a government agency, which
was never meant to exist in the first place under the Constitution,
can expand their role into legislative and legal matters without the
consent of Congress, we indeed have a serious problem on our hands.
The programs are bad enough in themselves, but the abuse of the rule
of law and ignoring the separation of powers makes these expanding
programs that much more dangerous to our entire political system and
is a direct attack on personal liberty.

If one cares about providing the maximum and best housing for the
maximum number of people, one must consider a free-market approach in
association with a sound non-depreciating currency.  We have been
operating a public housing program directly opposite to this, and
along with steady inflation and government promotion of housing since
the 1960s, the housing market has been grossly distorted. We can soon
expect a major downward correction in the housing industry, prompted
by rising interest rates.

Our attitudes toward foreign policy have dramatically changed since
the beginning of the century.  From George Washington through Grover
Cleveland, the accepted policy was to avoid entangling alliances.
Although we spread our wings westward and southward as part of our
manifest destiny, in the 19th Century we accepted the Monroe Doctrine
notion that Europeans and Asians should stay out of our affairs in
this hemisphere and we theirs.  McKinley, Teddy Roosevelt, and the
Spanish American War changed all of that.  Our intellectual and
political leaders at the turn of the last century brought into vogue
the interventionist doctrine setting the stage for the past 100 years
of global military activism.

From a country that once minded its own business, we now find
ourselves with military personnel in more than 130 different
countries, protecting our modern-day American empire.  Not only do we
have troops spread to the four corners of the earth, we find Coast
Guard Cutters in the Mediterranean and around the world, our FBI in
any country we choose, and the CIA in places the Congress doesn't even
know about.

It is a truism that the state grows and freedom is diminished in times
of war.  Almost perpetual war in the 20th Century has significantly
contributed to steadily undermining our liberties while glorifying the
state.  In addition to the military wars, liberty has also suffered
from the domestic "wars" on poverty, literacy, drugs, homelessness,
privacy, and many others.

We have, in the last 100 years, gone from the accepted and cherished
notion of a sovereign nation to one of a globalist, New World Order.
As we once had three separate branches of our government, the United
Nations proudly uses its three branches, the World Bank, the IMF, and
the World Trade Organization to work their will in this new era of
globalism.  Because the US is by far the strongest military industrial
power, it can dictate the terms of these international institutions,
protecting what we see as our various interests such as oil, along
with satisfying our military industrial complex.  Our commercial
interests and foreign policy are no longer separate.  This allows for
subsidized profits, while the taxpayers are forced to protect huge
corporations against any losses from overseas investments.  The
argument that we go about the world out of humanitarian concerns for
those suffering-which was the excuse for bombing Serbia-is a farce.

As bad as it is that average Americans are forced to subsidize such a
system, we additionally are placed in greater danger because of our
arrogant policy of bombing nations that do not submit to our wishes.
This generates the hatred directed toward America, even if at times it
seems suppressed, and exposes us to a greater threat of terrorism,
since this is the only vehicle our victims can use to retaliate
against a powerful military state.

But even with the apparent success of our foreign policy and the
military might we still have, the actual truth is that we have spread
ourselves too thinly and may well have difficulty defending ourselves
if we are ever threatened by any significant force around the world.
At the close of this century, we find our military preparedness and
morale at an all-time low.  It will become more obvious as we move
into the 21st Century that the cost of maintaining this worldwide
presence is too high and cutbacks will be necessary.  The cost in
terms of liberties lost and the unnecessary exposure to terrorism are
difficult to determine, but in time it will become apparent to all of
us that foreign interventionism is of no benefit to American citizens,
but instead is a threat to our liberties.

Throughout our early history and up to World War I, our wars were
fought with volunteers.  There was no military draft except for a
failed attempt by Lincoln in the Civil War, which ended with justified
riots and rebellion against it.  The attitudes toward the draft
definitely changed over the past century.  Draftees were said to be
necessary to fight in World War I, World War II, Korea, and Vietnam.
This change in attitude has definitely satisfied those who believe
that we have an obligation to police the world.  The idiocy of Vietnam
served as a catalyst for an anti-draft attitude, which is still alive
today.  Fortunately, we have not had a draft for over 25 years, but
Congress refuses to address this matter in a principled fashion by
abolishing, once and for all, the useless Selective Service System.
Too many authoritarians in Congress still believe that in times of
need an army of teenage draftees will be needed to defend our
commercial interests throughout the world.

A return to the spirit of the Republic would mean that a draft would
never be used and all able-bodied persons would be willing to
volunteer in defense of their liberty.  Without the willingness to do
so, liberty cannot be saved.  A conscripted army can never substitute
for the willingness of freedom-loving Americans to defend their
country out of their love for liberty.

The US monetary system during the 20th Century has dramatically
changed from the one authorized by the Constitution.  Only silver and
gold were to be used in payment of debt and no paper money was to be
issued.  In one of the few restrictions on the states, the
Constitution prohibited them from issuing their own money and they
were to use only gold and silver in payment of debt.  No central bank
was authorized.  The authors of the Constitution were well aware of
the dangers of inflation, having seen the great harm associated with
the destruction of the Continental currency.  They never wanted to see
another system that ended with the slogan "It's not worth a
Continental."  They much preferred "sound as a dollar" or "as good as
gold" as a description of our currency.  Unfortunately their concerns,
as they were reflected in the Constitution, have been ignored and, as
this century closes, we do not have a sound dollar "as good as gold."
The changes to our monetary system are by far the most significant
economic events of the 20th Century.

The gold dollar of 1900 is now nothing more than a Federal Reserve
note with a promise by untrustworthy politicians and the central
bankers to pay nothing for it.  No longer is there silver or gold
available to protect the value of a steadily depreciating currency.
This is a fraud of the worst kind and the type of crime that would put
a private citizen behind bars.

But there have been too many special interests benefiting by our fiat
currency, too much ignorance and too much apathy regarding the nature
of money. We will surely pay the price for this negligence.  The
relative soundness of our currency that we enjoy as we move into the
21st Century will not persist. The instability in world currency
markets, because of the dollars' acceptance for so many years as a
reserve currency, will cause devastating adjustments that Congress
will eventually be forced to deal with.

The transition from sound money to paper money did not occur
instantaneously.  It occurred over a 58-year period between 1913 and
1971 and the mischief continues today.  Our central bank, the Federal
Reserve System (established in 1913 after two failed efforts in the
19th Century) has been the driving force behind the development of our
current fiat system.  Since the turn of the century, we have seen our
dollar lose 95% of its purchasing power, and it continues to
depreciate.  This is nothing less than theft, and those responsible
should be held accountable.  The record of the Federal Reserve is
abysmal. Yet at the close of the 20th Century, its chairman is held in
extremely high esteem, with almost zero calls for study of the
monetary system with intent to once again have the dollar linked to
gold.

Ironically, the government and politicians are held in very low
esteem, yet the significant trust in them to maintain the value of the
currency is not questioned.  But it should be.

The reasons for rejecting gold and promoting paper are not mysterious,
since quite a few special interests benefit.  Deficit financing is
much more difficult when there's no central bank available to monetize
government debt.  This gives license to politicians to spend lavishly
on the projects that are most likely to get them reelected.  War is
more difficult to pursue if government has to borrow or tax the people
for its financing.  The Federal Reserve's ability to create credit out
of thin air to pay the bills run up by Congress, establishes a
symbiosis that is easy for the politicians to love.  It's also
advantageous for the politicians to ignore the negative effects from
such a monetary arrangement, since they tend to be hidden and
disseminated.

A paper-money system attracts support from various economic groups.
Bankers benefit from the "float" they get with a fractional reserve
banking system that accompanies a fiat monetary system.  Giant
corporations, who get to borrow large funds at below-market interest
rates, enjoy the system and consistently call for more inflation and
artificially low interest rates.  Even the general public seems to
benefit from the artificial booms brought about by credit creation,
with lower interest rates allowing major purchases like homes and
cars.

The naieve and uninformed fully endorse the current system,
because the benefits are readily apparent while the disadvantages are
hidden, delayed, or not understood.  The politicians, central bankers,
commercial banks, big-business borrowers all believe their needs
justify such a system.  But the costs are many and the dangers are
real.  Because of easy credit throughout this century, we have found
that financing war was easier than if taxes had to be raised.  The
many wars we have fought and the continuous military confrontations in
smaller wars since Vietnam have made the 20th Century a bloody
century.  It is most likely that we would have pursued a less
militaristic foreign policy if financing it had been more difficult.
Likewise, financing the welfare state would have progressed much
slower if our deficits could not have been financed by an
accommodative central bank willing to inflate the money supply at
will.

There are other real costs as well, that few are willing to believe
are a direct consequence of Federal Reserve Board policy.  Rampant
inflation after World War I, as well as the 1921 Depression, were a
consequence of monetary policy during and following the war.  The
stock market speculation of the 1920s, the stock market collapse of
1929, and the Depression of the 1930s (causing millions to be
unemployed) all resulted from Federal Reserve Board monetary mischief.

Price inflation of the early 1950s was a consequence of monetary
inflation required to fight the Korean War.  Wage and price controls
used then totally failed, yet the same canard was used during the
Vietnam War in the early 1970s to again impose wage and price controls
with even worse results.  All the price inflation, all the
distortions, all the recessions and unemployment should be laid at the
doorstep of the Federal Reserve.  The Fed is an accomplice in
promoting all unnecessary war as well as the useless and harmful
welfare programs with its willingness to cover Congress' profligate
spending habits.

Even though the Fed did great harm before 1971, after the total
elimination of the gold dollar linkage, the problems of deficit
spending, welfare expansion, and military industrial complex influence
have gotten much worse.

Although many claim the 1990s have been great economic years, Federal
Reserve board action of the past decade has caused problems yet to
manifest themselves.  The inevitable correction will come as the new
century begins and is likely to be quite serious.

The stage has been set.  Rampant monetary growth has led to historic
high asset inflation, massive speculation, over-capacity,
malinvestment, excessive debt, negative savings rate, and a current
account deficit of huge proportions.  These conditions dictate a
painful adjustment, something that would have never occurred under a
gold standard.  The special benefits of foreigners taking our inflated
dollars for low-priced goods and then loaning them back to us will
eventually end.  The dollar must fall, interest rates must rise, price
inflation will accelerate, the financial asset bubble will burst, and
a dangerous downturn in the economy will follow.  There are many
reasons to believe the economic slowdown will be worldwide since the
dollar is the reserve currency of the world.  An illusion about our
dollar's value has allowed us to prop up Europe and Japan in this past
decade during a period of weak growth for them, but when reality sets
in, economic conditions will deteriorate. Greater computer speed,
which has helped to stimulate the boom of the 1990s, will work in the
opposite direction as all the speculative positions unwind, and that
includes the tens of trillion of dollars in derivatives.  There was a
good reason the Federal Reserve rushed in to rescue Long-Term Capital
Management with a multi-billion dollar bailout.  It was unadulterated
fear that the big correction was about to begin.  Up until now,
feeding the credit bubble with even more credit has worked and is the
only tool they have to fight the business cycle, but eventually
control will be lost.

A paper money system is dangerous economically and not
constitutionally authorized.  It's also immoral for government to
"counterfeit" money, which dilutes the value of the currency and
steals value from those who hold the currency and those who did not
necessarily benefit from its early circulation.  Not everyone benefits
from the largesse of government spending programs or a systematic
debasement of the currency.  The middle class, those not on welfare
and not in the military industrial complex, suffer the most from
rising prices and job losses in the correction phase of the business
cycle.  Congress must someday restore sound money to America.  It's
mandated in the Constitution; it's economically sound to do so; and
it's morally right to guarantee a standard of value for the money.
Our oath of office obligates all Members of Congress to pay attention
to this and participate in this needed reform.

A police state is incompatible with liberty.  A hundred years ago the
federal government was responsible for enforcing very few laws.  This
has dramatically changed.  There are now over 3,000 federal laws and
10,000 regulations employing hundreds of thousands of bureaucrats
diligently enforcing them, with over 80,000 of them carrying guns. We
now have an armed national police state, just as Jefferson complained
of King George in the Declaration of Independence: "He has sent hither
swarms of officers to harass our people and eat out their substance."
A lot of political and police power has shifted from the state and
local communities to the federal government over the past hundred
years.  If a constitutional republic is desired and individual liberty
is cherished, this concentration of power cannot be tolerated.

Congress has been derelict in creating the agencies in the first place
and ceding to the executive the power to write regulations and even
tax without congressional approval.  These agencies enforce their own
laws and supervise their own administrative court system where
citizens are considered guilty until proven innocent.  The
Constitution has been thrown out the window for all practical
purposes, and although more Americans everyday complain loudly,
Congress does nothing to stop it.

The promoters of bureaucratic legislation claim to have good
intentions but they fail to acknowledge the costs, the inefficiency or
the undermining of individual rights.  Worker safety, environmental
concerns, drug usage, gun control, welfarism, banking regulations,
government insurance, health programs, insurance against economic and
natural disasters, and regulation of fish and wildlife are just a few
of the issues that prompt the unlimited use of federal regulatory and
legislative power to deal with perceived problems.  But inevitably,
for every attempt to solve one problem, government creates two new
ones.  National politicians aren't likely to volunteer a market or
local-government solution to a problem, or they will find out how
unnecessary they really are.

Congress' careless attitude about the federal bureaucracy and its
penchant for incessant legislation have prompted serious abuse of
every American citizen.  Last year alone there were more than 42,000
civil forfeitures of property occurring without due process of law or
a conviction of a crime, and oftentimes the owners weren't even
charged with a crime.  Return of illegally seized property is
difficult, and the owner is forced to prove his innocence in order to
retrieve it.  Even though many innocent Americans have suffered, these
laws have done nothing to stop drug usage or change people's attitudes
toward the IRS.  Seizures and forfeitures only make the problems they
are trying to solve that much worse.  The idea that a police
department, under federal law, can seize property and receive direct
benefit from it is an outrage.  The proceeds can be distributed to the
various police agencies without going through the budgetary process.
This dangerous incentive must end.

The national police state mentality has essentially taken over crime
investigation throughout the country.  Our local sheriffs are
intimidated and frequently overruled by the national police.  Anything
worse than writing traffic tickets prompts swarms of federal agents to
the scene.  We frequently see the FBI, DEA, CIA, BATF, Fish and
Wildlife, IRS, federal marshals, and even the Army involved in local
law enforcement.  They don't come to assist, but to take over. The two
most notorious examples of federal abuse of police powers were seen at
Ruby Ridge and Waco, where non-aggressive citizens were needlessly
provoked and killed by federal agents.  At Waco even army tanks were
used to deal with a situation the local sheriff could have easily
handled.  These two incidents are well known, but thousands of other
similar abuses routinely occur with little publicity.  The federal
police-state, seen in action at Ruby Ridge and Waco, hopefully is not
a sign of things to come; but it could be if we're not careful.

If the steady growth of the federal police power continues, the
American Republic cannot survive.  The Congresses of the 20th Century
have steadily undermined the principle that the government closest to
home must deal with law and order and not the federal government.  The
federal courts also have significantly contributed to this trend.
Hopefully, in the new century, our support for a national police state
will be diminished.

We have, in this past century, not only seen the undermining of the
federalism that the Constitution desperately tried to preserve, but
the principle of separations of power among the three branches of
government has been severely compromised as well.

The Supreme Court no longer just rules on constitutionality but
frequently rewrites the law with attempts at comprehensive social
engineering.  The most blatant example was the Roe vs. Wade ruling.
The federal courts should be hearing a lot fewer cases, deferring as
often as possible to the state courts.  Throughout the 20th Century
with Congress' obsession for writing laws for everything, the federal
courts were quite willing to support the idea of a huge
interventionist federal government.  The fact that the police officers
in the Rodney King case were tried twice for the same crime, ignoring
the constitutional prohibition against double jeopardy, was
astoundingly condoned by the courts rather than condemned.  It is not
an encouraging sign that the concept of equal protection under the law
will prevail.

When it comes to Executive Orders, it's gotten completely out of hand.
Executive Orders may legitimately be used by a president to carry out
his constitutionally authorized duties but that would require far
fewer orders than modern-day presidents have issued.  As the 20th
Century comes to a close, we find the executive branch willfully and
arrogantly using the Executive Order to deliberately circumvent the
legislative body and bragging about it.

Although nearly 100,000 American battle deaths have occurred since
World War II, and both big and small wars have been fought almost
continuously, there has not been a congressional declaration of war
since 1941.  Our presidents now fight wars, not only without explicit
congressional approval, but also in the name of the United Nations
with our troops now serving under foreign commanders.  Our presidents
have assured us that UN authorization is all that's needed to send our
troops into battle.  The 1973 War Powers Resolution, meant to restrict
presidential war powers, has either been ignored by our presidents or
used to justify war for up to 90 days.  The Congress and the people,
too often, have chosen to ignore this problem saying little about the
recent bombing in Serbia.  The continual bombing of Iraq, which has
now been going on for over 9 years, is virtually ignored.  If a
president can decide on the issue of war, without a vote of the
Congress, a representative republic does not exist.  Our presidents
should not have the authority to declare national emergencies, and
they certainly should not have authority to declare marshal law, a
power the Congress has already granted for any future emergency.
Economic and political crises can develop quickly, and overly
aggressive presidents are only too willing to enhance their own power
in dealing with them.

Congress, sadly, throughout this century has been only too willing to
grant authority to our presidents at the sacrifice of its own.  The
idea of separate but equal branches of government has been forgotten
and the Congress bears much of the responsibility for this trend.

Executive Powers in the past hundred years, have grown steadily with
the creation of agencies that write and enforce their own regulations
and with Congress allowing the President to use Executive Orders
without restraint.  But in addition, there have been various other
special vehicles that our presidents use without congressional
oversight.  For example the Exchange Stabilization Fund, set up during
the Depression, has over $34 billion available to be used at the
President's discretion without congressional approval.  This slush
fund grows each year as it is paid interest on the securities it
holds.  It was instrumental in the $50 billion Mexican bailout in
1995.

The CIA is so secretive that even those Congressmen privy to its
operation have little knowledge of what this secret government
actually does around the world.  We know, of course, it has been
involved in the past 50 years in assassinations and government
overthrows on frequent occasions.

The Federal Reserve operation, which works hand-in-hand with the
administration, is not subject to congressional oversight.  The Fed
manipulates currency exchange rates, controls short-term interest
rates, and fixes the gold price; all behind closed doors.  Bailing out
foreign governments, financial corporations, and huge banks can all be
achieved without congressional approval.  A hundred years ago when we
had a gold standard, credit could not be created out of thin air, and
because a much more limited government philosophy prevailed, this
could not have been possible.  Today it's hard to even document what
goes on, let alone expect Congress to control it.

The people should be able to closely monitor the government, but as
our government grows in size and scope, it seeks to monitor our every
move.  Attacks on our privacy are incessant and are always justified
by citing so-called legitimate needs of the state, efficiency, and law
enforcement.  Plans are laid for numerous data banks to record
everyone's activities.  A national ID card using our social security
number is the goal of many, and even though we achieved a significant
victory in delaying its final approval last year, the promoters will
surely persist in their efforts.  Plans are made for a medical data
bank to be kept and used against our wishes.  Job banks and details of
all our lending activities continue to be of interest to all national
policing agencies to make sure they know exactly where the drug
dealers, illegal aliens, and tax dodgers are and what they're doing,
it is argued. For national security purposes, the Echelon system of
monitoring all overseas phone calls has been introduced, yet the
details of this program are not available to any inquiring Member of
Congress.

The government knew very little about each individual American citizen
in 1900, but starting with World War I, there has been a systematic
growth of government surveillance of everyone's activities, with
multiple records being kept.  Today, true privacy is essentially a
thing of the past.  The FBI and the IRS have been used by various
administrations to snoop and harass political opponents and there has
been little effort by Congress to end this abuse.  A free society,
that is a constitutional republic, cannot be maintained if privacy is
not highly cherished and protected by the government, rather than
abused by it.

And we can expect it to get worse.  Secretary of Defense Bill Cohen
was recently quoted as saying: "Terrorism is escalating to the point
that US citizens may soon have to choose between civil liberties and
more intrusive forms of protection;" all in the name of taking care of
us!  As far as I am concerned, we could all do with a lot less
government protection and security.  The offer of government
benevolence is the worst reason to sacrifice liberty, but we have seen
a lot of that during the 20th Century.

Probably the most significant change in attitude that occurred in the
20th Century was that with respect to life itself.  Although abortion
has been performed for hundreds if not thousands of years, it was
rarely considered an acceptable and routine medical procedure without
moral consequence.  Since 1973 abortion in America has become routine
and justified by a contorted understanding of the right to privacy.
The difference between American's rejection of abortions at the
beginning of the century, compared to today's casual acceptance, is
like night and day.  Although a vocal number of Americans express
their disgust with abortion on demand, our legislative bodies and the
courts claim that the procedure is a constitutionally protected right,
disregarding all scientific evidence and legal precedents that
recognize the unborn as a legal living entity deserving protection of
the law.  Ironically the greatest proponents of abortion are the same
ones who advocate imprisonment for anyone who disturbs the natural
habitat of a toad.

This loss of respect for human life in the latter half of the 20th
Century has yet to have its full impact on our society.  Without a
deep concern for life, and with the casual disposing of living human
fetuses, respect for liberty is greatly diminished.  This has allowed
a subtle but real justification for those who commit violent acts
against fellow human beings.

It should surprise no one that a teenager delivering a term newborn is
capable of throwing the child away in a garbage dumpster. The new
mother in this circumstance is acting consistently knowing that if an
abortion is done just before a delivery it's legally justified and the
abortionist is paid to kill the child.  Sale of fetal parts to
tax-supported institutions is now an accepted practice.  This moral
dilemma that our society has encountered over the past 40 years, if
not resolved in favor of life, will make it impossible for a system of
laws to protect the life and liberty of any citizen.  We can expect
senseless violence to continue as a sense of self-worth is undermined.

Children know that mothers and sisters when distraught have abortions
to solve the problem of an unwanted pregnancy.  Distraught teenagers
in copying this behavior are now more prone to use violence against
others or themselves when provoked or confused.  This tendency is made
worse because they see, in this age of abortion, their own lives as
having less value, thus destroying their self-esteem.

The prime reason government is organized in a free society is to
protect life---not to protect those who take life.  Today, not only do
we protect the abortionist, we take taxpayers funds to pay for
abortions domestically as well as overseas.  This egregious policy
will continue to plague us well into the 21st Century.

A free society designed to protect life and liberty is incompatible
with government sanctioning and financing abortion on demand.  It
should not be a surprise to anyone that as abortion became more
acceptable, our society became more violent and less free.  The irony
is that Roe vs. Wade justified abortion using a privacy argument,
conveniently forgetting that not protecting the innocent unborn is the
most serious violation of privacy possible.  If the location of the
fetus is the justification for legalized killing, the privacy of our
homes would permit the killing of the newborn, the deformed, and the
elderly-a direction in which we find ourselves going.  As
government-financed medical care increases, we will hear more economic
arguments for euthanasia-that's "mercy" killing for the benefit of the
budget planners.  Already we hear these economic arguments for killing
the elderly and terminally ill.

Last year the House made a serious error by trying to federalize the
crime of killing a fetus occurring in an act of violence.  The stated
goal was to emphasize that the fetus deserved legal protection under
the law.  And indeed it should and does-at the state level.
Federalizing any act of violence is unconstitutional; essentially all
violent acts should be dealt with by the states.  And because we have
allowed the courts and Congress to federalize such laws, we find more
good state laws are overridden than good federal laws written.  Roe
vs. Wade federalized state abortion laws and ushered in the age of
abortion.  The Unborn Victims of Violence Act, if passed into law,
will do great harm by explicitly excluding abortionists, thus
codifying for the first time the Roe vs. Wade concept and giving even
greater legal protection to the abortionist.

The responsibility of the Congress is twofold.  First, we should never
fund abortions.  Nothing could be more heinous than forcing those with
strong right-to-life beliefs to pay for abortions.  Second, Roe
vs. Wade must be replaced by limiting jurisdiction, which can be done
through legislation-a constitutional option.  If we as a nation do not
once again show respect and protect the life of the unborn, we can
expect the factions that have emerged on each side of this issue to
become more vocal and violent.  A nation that can casually toss away
its smallest and most vulnerable members and call it a "right" cannot
continue to protect the lives or rights of its other citizens.

Much has changed over the past hundred years.  Where technology has
improved our living standards, we find that our government has
significantly changed from one of limited scope to that of pervasive
intervention.

A hundred years ago, it was generally conceded that one extremely
important government function was to enforce contracts made
voluntarily in the marketplace.  Today government notoriously
interferes with almost every voluntary economic transaction.
Consumerism, labor-law, wage standards, hiring and firing regulations,
political correctness, affirmative action, the Americans with
Disabilities Act, the tax code, and others all place a burden on the
two parties struggling to transact business.  The EPA, OSHA, and
government-generated litigation also interfere with voluntary
contracts.  At times it seems a miracle that our society adapts and
continues to perform reasonably well in spite of the many bureaucratic
dictates.

As the 20th Century comes to a close, we see a dramatic change from a
government that once served an important function by emphasizing the
value of voluntary contracts to one that excessively interferes with
them.

Although the interference is greater in economic associations than in
social, the principle is the same.  Already we see the political
correctness movement interfering with social and religious
associations.  Data banks are set up to keep records on everyone,
especially groups with strong religious views and anybody who would be
so bold as to call himself a "patriot".  The notion that there is a
difference between murder and murder driven by hate has established
the principle of thought crime, a dangerous trend indeed.

When the business cycle turns down, all the regulations and laws that
interfere with economic and personal transactions will not be as well
tolerated, and then the true cost will become apparent.  It is under
the conditions of a weak economy that such government interference
generates a reaction to the anger over the rules that has been
suppressed.

To the statist, the idea that average people can and should take care
of themselves by making their own decisions, and that they don't need
Big Brother to protect them in everything they do, is anathema to the
way they think.  The bureaucratic mindset is convinced that without
the politicians' efforts, no one would be protected from anything,
rejecting the idea of a free-market economy out of ignorance or
arrogance.

This change in the 20th Century has significantly contributed to the
dependency of our poor on government handouts, the recipients being
convinced they are entitled to help and that they are incapable of
taking care of themselves.  A serious loss of self-esteem and
unhappiness result, even if the system on the short run seems to help
them get by.

There were no federal laws at the end of the 19th Century dealing with
drugs or guns.  Gun violence was rare, and abuse of addictive
substances was only a minor problem.  Now after a hundred years of
progressive government intervention in dealing with guns and drugs,
with thousands of laws and regulations, we have more gun violence and
a huge drug problem.  Before the social authoritarians decided to
reform the gun and drug culture, they amended the Constitution
enacting alcohol prohibition.  Prohibition failed to reduce alcohol
usage, and a crime wave resulted.  After 14 years, the American people
demanded repeal of this social engineering amendment and got it.
Prohibition prompted the production of poor-quality alcohol with
serious health consequences, while respect for the law was lost as it
was fragrantly violated.  At least at that time the American people
believed the Constitution had to be amended to prohibit the use of
alcohol, something that is ignored today in the federal government's
effort to stop drug usage.In spite of the obvious failure of alcohol
prohibition, the federal government after its repeal, turned its
sights on gun ownership and drug usage.

The many federal anti-gun laws written since 1934, along with the
constant threat of outright registration and confiscation, have put
the FBI and the BATF at odds with millions of law-abiding citizens who
believe the Constitution is explicit in granting the right of gun
ownership to all non-violent Americans.  Our government pursued
alcohol prohibition in the 1920s and confiscation of gold in the
1930s, so it's logical to conclude that our government is quite
capable of confiscating all privately owned firearms.  That has not
yet occurred, but as we move into the next century, many in Washington
advocate just that and would do it if they didn't think the American
people would revolt, just as they did against alcohol prohibition.

Throughout this century, there has been a move toward drug prohibition
starting with the Harrison Act in 1912.  The first federal marijuana
law was pushed through by FDR in 1938, but the real war on drugs has
been fought with intensity for the past 30 years.

Hundreds of billions of dollars have been spent, and not only is there
no evidence of reduced drug usage, we have instead seen a tremendous
increase.  Many deaths have occurred from overdoses of street drugs,
since there is no quality control or labeling.  Crime, as a
consequence of drug prohibition, has skyrocketed, and our prisons are
overflowing.  Many prisoners are non-violent and should be treated as
patients with addictions, not as criminals. Irrational mandatory
minimal sentences have caused a great deal of harm.  We have
non-violent drug offenders doing life sentences, and there is no room
to incarcerate the rapists and murderers.

With drugs and needles illegal, the unintended consequence of the
spread of AIDs and hepatitis through dirty needles has put a greater
burden on the taxpayers who are forced to care for the victims.  This
ridiculous system that offers a jail cell for a sick addict rather
than treatment has pushed many a young girl into prostitution to pay
for drugs priced hundreds of times higher than they are worth.  But
the drug dealers love the system and dread a new approach.  When we
finally decide that drug prohibition has been no more successful than
alcohol prohibition, the drug dealers will disappear.

But the monster drug problem we have created is compounded by moves to
tax citizens so government can hand out free needles to drug addicts
who are breaking the law, in hopes there will be less spread of
hepatitis and AIDs in order to reduce government health-care costs.
This proposal shows how bankrupt we are at coming to grips with this
problem.

And it seems we will never learn.  Tobacco is about to be categorized
as a drug and a prohibition of sorts imposed.  This will make the drug
war seem small if we continue to expand the tobacco war.  Talk about
insane government policies of the 20th Century, tobacco policy wins
the prize.  First we subsidize tobacco in response to demands by the
special interests, knowing full well even from the beginning that
tobacco had many negative health consequences.  Then we spend
taxpayers' money, warning the people of its dangers without stopping
the subsidies.  Government then pays for the care of those who choose
to smoke despite the known dangers and warnings.  But it did not stop
there.  The trial lawyers' lobby saw to it that local government
entities could sue tobacco companies for reimbursements of the excess
costs they were bearing in taking care of smoking-related illnesses.
And the only way this could be paid for was to place a tax on those
people who smoke.

How could such silliness go on for so long?  For one reason.  We as a
nation have forgotten a basic precept of a free society-that all
citizens must be responsible for their own acts.  If one smokes and
gets sick, that's the problem of the one making the decision to smoke,
or take any other risks for that matter, not the innocent taxpayers
who have already been forced to pay for the tobacco subsidies and
government health warning ads.  Beneficiaries of this monstrous policy
have been: tobacco farmers, tobacco manufacturers, politicians,
bureaucrats, smokers, health organizations and physicians, and
especially the trial lawyers.  Who suffers?  The innocent taxpayers
that have no voice in the matter and who acted responsibly and chose
not to smoke.  Think of what it would mean if we followed this same
logic and implemented a federal social program, similar to the current
war on smoking, designed to reduce the spread of AIDS within the gay
community.  Astoundingly, we have done the opposite by making AIDS a
politically correct disease.  There was certainly a different attitude
a hundred years ago regarding those with sexually transmitted diseases
like syphilis, compared to the special status given AIDS victims
today.

And it is said an interventionist economy is needed to make society
fair to everyone!  We need no more government "fairness" campaigns.
Egalitarianism never works and inevitably penalizes the innocent.
Government in a free society is supposed to protect the innocent,
encourage self-reliance, and impose equal justice while allowing
everyone to benefit from their own effort and suffer the consequence
of their acts.

A free and independent people need no authoritarian central government
dictating eating, drinking, gambling, sexual or smoking habits.  When
rules are required, they should come from the government closest to
home, as it once did prior to America's ill-fated 20th Century
experiment with alcohol prohibition.  Let's hope we show more common
sense in the 21st Century in these matters than we did in the 20th.

A compulsive attitude by politicians to regulate non-violent behavior
may be well intentioned but leads to many unintended consequences.
Legislation passed in the second half of the 20th Century dealing with
drugs and personal habehind the national police state.  The excuse
given for calling in the Army helicopters and tanks at the Waco
disaster was that the authorities had evidence of an amphetamine lab
on the Davidian's property.  This was never proven, but nevertheless
it gave the legal cover-but not the proper constitutional
authority-for escalating the attack on the Davidians, which led to the
senseless killing of so many innocent people.  The attitude
surrounding this entire issue needs to change. We should never turn
over the job of dealing with bad habits to our federal government.
That is a recipe for disaster.

## Social and Philosophic Changes

America has not only changed technologically in the past hundred
years, but our social attitudes and personal philosophies have changed
as well.  We have less respect for life and less love for liberty.  We
are obsessed with material things, along with rowdy and raucous
entertainment. Needs and wants have become rights for both rich and
poor.  The idea of instant gratification too often guides our actions,
and when satisfaction is not forthcoming anger and violence break out.
Road rage and airline passenger rage are seen more frequently.
Regardless of fault, a bad outcome in almost anything, even if beyond
human control will prompt a lawsuit.  Too many believe they deserve to
win the lottery, and a lawsuit helps the odds.  Unfortunately the only
winners too often are the lawyers hyping the litigation.

Few Americans are convinced anymore that productive effort is the most
important factor in economic success and personal satisfaction.  One
did not get rich in the 1990s investing in companies that had
significant or modest earnings.  The most successful investors bought
companies that had no earnings and the gambling paid off big.  This
attitude cannot create perpetual wealth and must someday end.

Today financial gurus are obsessed with speculation in the next
initial public offering (IPO) and express no interest in the cause of
liberty, without which markets cannot exist.

Lying and cheating are now acceptable by the majority.  This was not
true a hundred years ago when moral standards were higher.  The
October 1999 issue of US News and World Report reveals that 84% of
college students believe cheating is necessary to get ahead in today's
world, and 90% are convinced there's no price to pay for cheating.
Not surprisingly, 90% of college students believe politicians often
cheat.  An equal percentage believe the media cheats as well.  There's
no way to know if the problem is this bad in the general population,
but these statistics indicate our young people do not trust our
politicians or media.  Trust has been replaced with a satisfaction in
the materialism that a speculative stock market, borrowing money, and
a spendthrift government can generate.  But what happens to our
society if the material abundance, which we enjoy, is ephemeral and
human trust is lost?

Social disorder will surely result and there will be a clamor for a
more authoritarian government.  This scenario may indeed threaten the
stability of our social order and significantly undermine all our
constitutional protections.  But there is no law or ethics committee
that will solve this problem of diminishing trust and honesty-that is
a problem of the heart, mind, and character to be dealt with by each
individual citizen.  The importance of the family unit today has been
greatly diminished compared to the close of the 19th Century.  Now,
fewer people get married, more divorces occur, and the number of
children born out of wedlock continues to rise.  Tax penalties are
placed on married couples; illegitimacy and single parenthood are
rewarded by government subsidies, and we find many authoritarians
arguing that the definition of marriage should change in order to
allow non-husband and wife couples to qualify for welfare handouts.
The welfare system has mocked the concept of marriage in the name of
political correctness, economic egalitarianism, and hetero-phobia.

Freedom of speech is still cherished in America, but the political
correctness movement has seriously undermined dissent on our
university campuses.  A conservative or libertarian black intellectual
is clearly not treated with the same respect afforded an authoritarian
black spokesman.  We now hear of individuals being sent to
psychiatrists when personal and social views are rude or out of the
ordinary.  It was commonplace in the Soviet system to incarcerate
political dissenters in "mental" institutions.  Those who received a
Soviet government designation of "socially undesirable elements" were
stripped of their rights.  Will this be the way we treat political
dissent in the future?  We hear of people losing their jobs because of
"socially undesirable" thoughts or for telling off-color jokes.  Today
sensitivity courses are routinely required in America to mold social
thinking for the simplest of infractions.  The thought-police are all
around us.  It's a bad sign.

Any academic discussion questioning the wisdom of our policies
surrounding World War II is met with shrill accusations of
anti-Semitism and Nazi lover.  No one is even permitted without
derision by the media, the university intellectuals, and the
politicians to ask why the United States allied itself with the
murdering Soviets and then turned over Eastern Europe to them while
ushering in a 45-year saber-rattling dangerous cold war period.  "Free
speech" is permitted in our universities for those who do not threaten
the status quo of welfarism, globalism, corporatism, and a financial
system that provides great benefits to powerful special interests.  If
a university professor does not follow the party line, he does not
receive tenure.

We find ourselves at the close of this century realizing all our
standards have been undermined.  

A monetary standard for our money is gone; the dollar is whatever the
government tells us it is.  There is no definition, and no promise to pay
anything for the notes issued ad-infinitum by the government.

Standards for education are continually lowered, de-emphasizing
excellence. Relative ethics are promoted, and moral absolutes are
ridiculed.  The influence of religion on our standards is frowned upon
and replaced by secular humanistic standards.

The work ethic has been replaced by a welfare ethic, based on need not
effort.  Strict standards required for an elite military force are
gone, and our lack of readiness reflects this.

Standards of behavior of our professional athletes seem to reflect the
rules followed in the ring by the professional wrestlers where
anything goes.

Managed medical care, driven by government decrees, has reduced its
quality and virtually ruined the doctor-patient relationship.

Movie and TV standards are so low that our young people's senses are
totally numbed by them.

Standards of courtesy on highways, airplanes, and shops are seriously
compromised and at time lead to senseless violence.

With the acceptance of abortion, our standards for life have become
totally arbitrary as they have become for liberty.  Endorsing the
arbitrary use of force by our government morally justifies the direct
use of force by disgruntled groups not satisfied with the slower
government process.

The standards for honesty and truth have certainly deteriorated during
the past hundred years.

Property ownership has been undermined through environmental
regulations and excessive taxation.  True ownership of property no
longer exists.

There has been a systematic undermining of legal and constitutional
principles once respected and followed for the protection of
individual liberty.

A society cannot continue in a state of moral anarchy.  Moral anarchy
will lead to political anarchy.  A society without clearly understood
standards of conduct cannot remain stable any more than an architect
can design and build a sturdy skyscraper with measuring instruments
that change in value each day.  We recently lost a NASA space probe
because someone failed to convert inches to centimeters-a simple but
deadly mistake in measuring physical standards.  If we as a people
debase our moral standards, the American Republic will meet a similar
fate.

## Law and Morality

Many Americans agree that this country is facing a moral crisis that
has been especially manifested in the closing decade of the 20th
Century.  Our President's personal conduct, the characters of our
politicians in general, the caliber of the arts, movies and
television, and our legal system have reflected this crisis.  The
personal conduct of many of our professional athletes and movie stars
has been less than praiseworthy.

Some politicians, sensing this, have pushed hard to write and strictly
enforce numerous laws regarding personal non-violent behavior with the
hope that the people will become more moral.  This has not happened,
but it has filled our prisons.  This year it will cost more than $40
billion to run our prison system.  The prison population, nearing 2
million, is up 70% in the last decade and two-thirds of all the
inmates did not commit an act of violence.  Mandatory minimum
drug-sentencing laws have been instrumental in this trend.

Laws clearly cannot alter moral behavior, and if it is attempted, it
creates bigger problems.  Only individuals with moral convictions can
make "society" moral.  But the law does reflect the general
consensus of the people regarding force and aggression, which is a
moral issue.  Government can be directed to restrain and punish
violent aggressive citizens or it can use aggressive force to rule the
people, redistribute wealth, make citizens follow certain moral
standards, and force them to practice certain personal habits.  Once
government is permitted to do the latter, even in a limited sense, the
guiding principle of an authoritarian government is established and
its power and influence over the people will steadily grow at the
expense of personal liberty.

No matter how well intentioned, an authoritarian government always
abuses its powers.  In its effort to achieve an egalitarian society,
the principle of inequality that freedom recognizes and protects is
lost.  Government then, instead of being an obstacle to violence
becomes the biggest perpetrator.  This invites all the special
interests to manipulate the monopoly and evil use of government power.
Twenty thousand lobbyists currently swarm Washington seeking special
advantage.  That's where we find ourselves today.

Although government cannot and should not try to make people better in
the personal moral sense, proper law should have a moral
non-aggressive basis to it-no lying, cheating, stealing, killing,
injuring, or threatening.  Government then would be limited to
protecting contracts, people, and property, while guaranteeing all
personal non-violent behaviors-even the controversial.

Although there are degrees in various authoritarian societies as to
how much power a government may wield, once government is given
authority to wield power, it does so in an ever-increasing fashion.
The pressure to use government authority to run the economy and our
lives depends on several factors.  These include a basic understanding
of personal liberty, respect for a constitutional republic, economic
myths, ignorance, and misplaced good intentions.  In every society
there are always those waiting in the wings for an opportunity to show
how brilliant they are, as they lust for power, convinced they know
what's best for everyone.  But the defenders of liberty know that what
is best for everyone is to be left alone, with a government limited to
stopping aggressive behavior.

## Philosophic Explanation

The 20th Century has produced socialist dictators the world over, from
Stalin, Hitler and Mao to Pol Pot, Castro, and Ho Chi Minh.  More than
200 million people died as a result of the bad ideas of these evil
men.  Each and every one of these dictators despised the principle of
private-property ownership-which then undermined all the other
liberties cherished by the people.

It is argued that the United States and now the world have learned of
a Third Way-something between extreme socialism and mean-spirited
capitalism.  But this is a dream.  The so-called friendly Third Way
endorses 100% the principle that government authority can be used to
direct our lives and the economy.  Once this is accepted, the
principle that man alone is responsible for his salvation and his life
on earth, which serves as the foundation for free-market capitalism,
is rejected.  The Third Way of friendly welfarism, or soft fascism,
that is, where government and businesses are seen as partners,
undermines freedom and sets the stage for authoritarian socialism.
Personal liberty cannot be preserved if we remain on the course on
which we find ourselves at the close of the 20th Century.

In our early history, it was understood that a free society embraced
both personal civil liberties and economic liberties.  During the 20th
Century, this unified concept of freedom has been undermined.  Today
we have one group talking about economic freedom while interfering
with our personal liberty and the other group condemning economic
liberty, while preaching the need to protect personal civil liberties.
Both groups reject liberty 50% of the time.  That leaves very few who
defend liberty all the time.  Sadly, there are too few in this country
who today understand and defend liberty in both areas.  A common
debate that we hear occurs over how we can write laws protecting
normal speech and at the same time limiting commercial speech as if
they were two entirely different things.

Many Americans wonder why Congress pays so little attention to the
Constitution and are bewildered as to how so much inappropriate
legislation gets passed.  But the Constitution is not entirely
ignored.  It is used correctly at times when it's convenient and
satisfies a particular goal, but never consistently across the board
on all legislation.  And too, the Constitution is all too frequently
made to say exactly what the authors of special legislation want it to
say.  That's the modern way; language can be made relative to our
times.  But without a precise understanding and respect for the
supreme law of the land, i.e., the Constitution, it no longer serves
as the guide for the rule of law. In its place we have substituted the
rule of man and the special interests.

That's how we have arrived at the close of this century without a
clear understanding or belief in the cardinal principles of the
Constitution-the separation of powers and the principle of federalism.
Instead, we are rushing toward a powerful executive, centralized
control, and a Congress greatly diminished in importance.  Executive
Orders, agency regulations, federal court rulings, and unratified
international agreements direct our government, economy, and foreign
policy.  Congress has truly been reduced in status and importance over
the past hundred years.  And when the people's voices are heard, it's
done indirectly through polling, allowing our leaders to decide how
far they can go without stirring up the people.  But this is opposite
to what the Constitution was supposed to do.  It was meant to protect
the rights of the minority from the dictates of the majority.  The
majority vote of the powerful and the influential was never meant to
rule the people.

We may not have a king telling us which trees we can cut down, but we
do have a government bureaucracy and a pervasive threat of litigation
by radical environmentalists who keep us from cutting our own trees,
digging a drainage ditch, or filling a puddle-all at the expense of
private-property ownership.

The key element in a free society is that individuals should wield
control of their own lives, receiving the benefits and suffering the
consequences of all their acts.  Once the individual becomes a pawn of
the state, whether a monarch or a majority runs the state, a free
society can no longer endure.  We are dangerously close to that
happening in America, even in the midst of plenty and with the
appearance of contentment.  If individual freedom is carelessly
snuffed out, the creative energy needed for productive pursuits will
dissipate.  Government produces nothing, and in its effort to
redistribute wealth, can only destroy it.

Freedom too often is rejected-especially in the midst of plenty--when
there is a belief that government largesse will last forever.  This is
true because it is tough to accept personal responsibility, practice
the work ethic, and follow the rules of peaceful co-existence with our
fellow man.  Continuous vigilance against the would-be tyrants who
promise security at minimal cost must be maintained.  The temptation
is great to accept the notion that everyone can be a beneficiary of
the caring state and a winner of the lottery or a class-action
lawsuit.  But history has proven there is never a shortage of
authoritarians-benevolent, of course-quite willing to tell others how
to live for their own good.  A little sacrifice of personal liberty is
a small price to pay for long-time security, it is too often reasoned.

## Worth the Effort

I have good friends who are in basic agreement with my analysis of the
current state of the American Republic, but argue it is a waste of
time and effort to try and change the direction in which we are going.
No one will listen, they argue, and besides the development of a
strong centralized authoritarian government is too far along to
reverse the trends of the 20th Century.  Why waste time in Congress
when so few people care about liberty, they ask. The masses, they
point out, are interested only in being taken care of, and the elite
want to keep receiving the special benefits allotted to them through
special-interest legislation.

I understand the odds, and I am not naieve enough to believe the
effort to preserve liberty is a cakewalk.  And I am very much aware of
my own limitations in achieving this goal.  But ideas, based on sound
and moral principles, do have consequences.  And powerful ideas can
have major consequences beyond our wildest dreams.  Our Founders
clearly understood this, and they knew they would be successful, even
against the overwhelming odds they faced.  They described this steady
confidence they shared with each other when hopes were dim as "divine
providence."  Good ideas can have good results and we must remember
bad ideas can have bad results.

It is crucial to understand that vague and confusing idealism produces
mediocre results, especially when it is up against a determined effort
to promote an authoritarian system that is sold to the people as
conciliatory and non-confrontational--a compromise, they say, between
the two extremes.  But it must be remembered that no matter how it's
portrayed, when big government systematically and steadily undermines
individual rights and economic liberty, it's still a powerful but
negative idea and it will not fade away easily.  Ideas of liberty are
a great threat to those who enjoy planning the economy and running
other people's lives.

The good news is that our numbers are growing.  More Americans than
ever before are very much aware of what's going on in Washington and
how, on a daily basis, their liberties are being undermined.  There
are more intellectual think tanks than ever before promoting the
market economy, private property ownership, and personal liberty.  The
large majority of Americans are sick and tired of being overtaxed and
despise the income tax and the inheritance tax.  The majority of
Americans know government programs fail to achieve their goals and
waste huge sums of money.  A smoldering resentment against the
unfairness of government efforts to force equality on us can inspire
violence, but instead it should be used to encourage an honest system
of equal justice based on individual not collective rights.  Sentiment
is moving in the direction of challenging the status quo of the
welfare and international warfare state.  The Internet has given hope
to millions who have felt their voices were not being heard.  And this
influence is just beginning.  The three major networks and
conventional government propaganda no longer control the information
now available to anyone with a computer.

The only way the supporters of big government can stop the Internet
will be to tax, regulate, and monitor it, and although it is a major
undertaking, plans are already being laid to do precisely that.  Big
government proponents are anxious to make the tax on the Internet an
international tax as advocated by the United Nations, apply the
Eschelon principle used to monitor all overseas phone calls to the
Internet and prevent the development of private encryption that would
guarantee privacy on the Internet.  These battles have just begun, and
if the civil libertarians and free-market proponents don't win this
fight to keep the Internet free and private, the tools for undermining
authoritarian government will be greatly reduced.  Victory for liberty
will probably elude us for decades.  The excuse they will give for
controlling the Internet will be to stop pornography, catch drug
dealers, monitor child molesters, and to do many other "good"
things.  We should not be deceived.

We face tough odds, but to avoid battle or believe there is a place to
escape to someplace else in the world would concede victory to those
who endorse authoritarian government.  The grand experiment in human
liberty must not be abandoned.  A renewed hope and understanding of
liberty is what we need as we move into the 21st Century.

A perfectly free society we know cannot be achieved, and the idea of
perfect socialism is an oxymoron. Pursuing that goal throughout the
20th Century has already caused untold human suffering.  The clear
goal of a free society must be understood and sought or the vision of
the authoritarians will face little resistance and will easily fill
the void.

There are precise goals Congress should work for, even under today's
difficult circumstances.  It must preserve, in the best manner
possible, voluntary options to failed government programs.  We must
legalize freedom to the maximum extent possible.

1. Complete police protection is impossible; therefore we must
  preserve the right to own weapons in self-defense.

1. In order to maintain economic protection against government
  debasement of the currency, gold ownership must be
  preserved-something taken away from the American people during the
  Depression.

1. Adequate retirement protection by the government is limited, if
  not ultimately impossible.  We must allow every citizen the
  opportunity to control all his or her retirement funds.

1. Government education has clearly failed.  We must guarantee the
  right of families to home school or send their kids to private
  schools and help them with tax credits.

1. Government snooping must be stopped.  We must work to protect
  all our privacy, especially on the Internet, prevent the National ID
  Card, and to stop the development of all government data banks.

1. Federal police functions are unconstitutional and increasingly
  abusive.  We should disarm all federal bureaucrats and return the
  police function to local authorities.

1. The army was never meant to be used in local policing
  activities.  We must firmly prohibit our presidents from using the
  military in local law enforcement operations which is now being
  planned for under the guise of fighting terrorism.

1. Foreign military intervention by our presidents in recent years,
  to police the American Empire, is a costly failure.  Foreign
  military intervention should not be permitted without explicit
  congressional approval.

1. Competitions in all elections should be guaranteed, and the
  monopoly powers gained by the two major parties through unfair
  signature requirements, high fees, and campaign donation controls
  should be removed.  Competitive parties should be allowed in all
  government sponsored debates.

1. We must do whatever is possible to help instill a spiritual love
  for freedom and recognize that our liberties depend on responsible
  individuals, not the group or the collective or society as a whole.
  The individual is the building block of a free and prosperous social
  order.


The Founders knew full well that the concept of liberty was fragile
and could easily be undermined.  They worried about the dangers that
lay ahead. As we move into the new century, it is an appropriate time
to rethink the principles upon which a free society rests.

Jefferson, concerned about the future, wrote: "Yes, we did produce a
near-perfect republic.  But will they keep it? Or will they, in the
enjoyment of plenty, lose the memory of freedom?  Material abundance
without character is the path of destruction."  "They" that he
refers to are " we."  And the future is now.  Freedom, Jefferson
knew, would produce "plenty," and with "material abundance" it's
easy to forget the responsibility the citizens of a free society must
assume if freedom and prosperity are to continue.  The key element for
the Republic's survival for Jefferson was the "character" of the
people, something no set of laws can instill.  The question today is
not that of abundance, but of character, respect for others, their
liberty and their property.  It is the character of the people that
determines the proper role for government in a free society.

Samuel Adams, likewise, warned future generations.  He referred to
"good manners" as the vital ingredient a free society needs to
survive.  Adams said: "Neither the wisest Constitution nor the wisest
laws will secure the liberty and happiness of a people whose manners
are universally corrupt."

The message is clear, if we lose our love of liberty and our manners
become corrupt, character is lost and so is the Republic.

But character is determined by free will and personal choice by each
of us individually.  Character can be restored or cast aside at a
whim.  The choice is ours alone and our leaders should show the way.

Some who are every bit as concerned as I am about our future and the
pervasive corrupt influence in our government in every aspect of our
lives offer other solutions.  Some say to solve the problem all we
have to do is write more detailed laws dealing with campaign finance
reform, ignoring how this might undermine the principles of liberty.
Similarly, others argue that what is needed is merely to place tighter
restrictions on the lobbyists in order to minimize their influence,
but they fail to recognize that this undermines our constitutional
right to petition our government for redress of grievances.

And there are others with equally good intentions that insist on
writing even more laws and regulations punishing non-violent behavior
in order to teach good manners and instill character.  But they fail
to see that tolerating non-violent behavior-even when stupid and
dangerous to one's own self-is the same as our freedom to express
unpopular political and offensive ideas and to promote and practice
religion in any way one chooses.  Resorting to writing more laws with
the intent of instilling "character" and good "manners" in the
people is anathema to liberty.  The love of liberty can come only from
within and is dependent on a stable family and a society that seeks
the brotherhood of man through voluntary and charitable means.

And there are others who believe that government force is legitimate
in promoting what they call fair economic redistribution.  The
proponents of this course have failed to read history and instead
adhere to economic myths.  They ignore the evidence that this effort
to help their fellow man will inevitably fail.  Instead, it will do
the opposite and lead to the impoverishment of many more.  But more
importantly, if left unchecked this approach will destroy liberty by
undermining the concept of private property ownership and free
markets, the bedrock of economic prosperity.

None of these alternatives will work.  Character and good manners are
not a government problem.  They reflect individual attitudes that can
only be changed by individuals themselves.  Freedom allows virtue and
excellence to blossom.  When government takes on the role of promoting
virtue, illegitimate government force is used, and tyrants quickly
appear on the scene to do the job.  Virtue and excellence become
illusive, and we find instead that the government officials become
corrupt and freedom is lost-the very ingredient required for promoting
virtue, harmony and the brotherhood of man.

Let's hope and pray that our political focus will soon shift toward
preserving liberty and individual responsibility and away from
authoritarianism.  The future of the American Republic depends on it.
Let us not forget the American dream depends on keeping alive the
spirit of liberty.

